GraphQL
=======

`flarchitect` can expose SQLAlchemy models through a GraphQL API. The
:func:`flarchitect.graphql.create_schema_from_models` helper builds a Graphene
schema from your models, while :meth:`flarchitect.Architect.init_graphql`
registers a ``/graphql`` endpoint and documents it in the OpenAPI spec.

Quick start
-----------

The simplest way to enable GraphQL is to feed your models to
``create_schema_from_models`` and register the resulting schema with the
architect:

.. code-block:: python

   schema = create_schema_from_models([User], db.session)
   architect.init_graphql(schema=schema)

The generated schema provides CRUD-style queries and mutations for each model.
An ``all_items`` query returns every ``Item`` and a ``create_item`` mutation adds
a new record.

Example mutation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``create_schema_from_models`` automatically generates a ``create_<table>``
mutation for each model. The mutation accepts all non-primary-key columns as
arguments. The example below creates a new ``Item``:

.. code-block:: graphql

   mutation {
       create_item(name: "Foo") {
           id
           name
       }
   }

Example query
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: graphql

   query {
       all_items {
           id
           name
       }
   }

Visit ``/graphql`` in a browser to access the interactive GraphiQL editor, or
send HTTP ``POST`` requests with a ``query`` payload.

Advanced usage
--------------

Custom type mappings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``flarchitect`` maps common SQLAlchemy column types to Graphene scalars via the
``SQLA_TYPE_MAPPING`` dictionary. Extend this mapping to support application
specific types:

.. code-block:: python

   from datetime import datetime
   import graphene
   from flarchitect.graphql import SQLA_TYPE_MAPPING

   SQLA_TYPE_MAPPING[datetime] = graphene.DateTime

Relationships
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Model relationships can be exposed by adding fields that return related object
types. The example below links ``Item`` to ``Category`` so a query for items can
also retrieve the owning category:

.. code-block:: python

   class Category(db.Model):
       id = mapped_column(Integer, primary_key=True)
       name = mapped_column(String)

   class Item(db.Model):
       id = mapped_column(Integer, primary_key=True)
       name = mapped_column(String)
       category_id = mapped_column(ForeignKey("category.id"))
       category = relationship(Category)

Filtering and pagination
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Queries accept optional ``limit`` and ``offset`` arguments to page through large
datasets. Additional arguments can be introduced to perform simple filtering:

.. code-block:: graphql

   query {
       all_items(name: "Foo", limit: 5, offset: 10) {
           id
           name
       }
   }

CRUD mutations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Beyond the automatically generated ``create_<table>`` mutation you can extend
the schema with ``update_`` and ``delete_`` operations. These mutations modify
existing records or remove them entirely:

.. code-block:: graphql

   mutation {
       update_item(id: 1, name: "Bar") {
           id
           name
       }
   }


Tips and trade-offs
-------------------

GraphQL offers flexible queries and reduces the number of HTTP round-trips, but
it also introduces additional complexity. Responses are not cacheable by
standard HTTP mechanisms, and na√Øve schemas can allow very expensive queries.
Ensure resolvers validate user input and consider depth limiting or query cost
analysis for production deployments.

Further examples are available in :mod:`demo.graphql`.
